[Merged by Bors] - news: release 0.8.0 (#406)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/news/2022-07-29-bevy-0.8/index.md

+++
title = "Bevy 0.8"
date = 2022-07-29
[extra]
author = "Carter Anderson"
twitter = "cart_cart"
github = "cart"
youtube = "cartdev"
image = "bevy_terrain.png"
show_image = true
image_subtitle = "Bevy-shaped mountains in a Bevy-based Witcher 3 terrain texturing tool built by rmemr"
image_subtitle_link = "https://codeberg.org/rmemr/w3.terrain-texturing"
+++

> Thanks to **X** contributors, **X** pull requests, and our [**generous sponsors**](https://github.com/sponsors/cart), I'm happy to announce the **Bevy 0.8** release on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/bevy)!

Reviewer: I think community reviews should be called out more explicitely, there's a lot of PRs stuck on lack of reviews. This post is pretty much entirely about PRs that have been merged and the authors of these, but people that have helped review and test PRs are not mentioned anywhere. There might be a more appropriate place for that.

```suggestion
Thanks to **X** contributors, community reviewers, **X** pull requests, and our [**generous sponsors**](https://github.com/sponsors/cart), I'm happy to announce the **Bevy 0.8** release on [crates.io](https://crates.io/crates/bevy)!
```

Reviewer 2: Agreed. We should also consider a call to action.

Author: Yeah I dig this, although I think it makes sense to put it after the pull requests number to "contextualize" it. Ill commit this as-is and then re-order in my next pass.

Reviewer 3: Something to the effect of:

"The most effective to get your favourite new feature or bugfix into Bevy is reviewing pull requests, so please head on over. We believe in you!"

?

Not completely sure about the phrasing, but it is _the_ most effective way to contribute at this point

Reviewer: Something like that could be added too, but my intention here was to thank the existing reviewers. .

> For those who don't know, Bevy is a refreshingly simple data-driven game engine built in Rust. You can check out [Quick Start Guide](/learn/book/getting-started/) to get started. Bevy is also free and open source forever! You can grab the full [source code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy) on GitHub. Check out [Bevy Assets](https://bevyengine.org/assets) for a collection of community-developed plugins, games, and learning resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For those who don't know, Bevy is a refreshingly simple data-driven game engine built in Rust. You can check out [Quick Start Guide](/learn/book/getting-started/) to try it today. It's free and open source forever! You can grab the full [source code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy) on GitHub. Check out [Bevy Assets](https://bevyengine.org/assets) for a collection of community-developed plugins, games, and learning resources.
```

Cleans up wording and avoids awkward repetition.

Semantic line breaks plz lol

To update an existing Bevy App or Plugin to **Bevy 0.8**, check out our [0.7 to 0.8 Migration Guide](/learn/book/migration-guides/0.7-0.8/).

> As always, there are a _ton_ of new features, bug fixes, and quality of life tweaks in this release, but here are some of the highlights: 

Reviewer 2: Capitalization for this section is inconsistent. I don't care what style, but pick one.

> As always, there are a _ton_ of new features, bug fixes, and quality of life tweaks in this release, but here are some of the highlights: 

Reviewer 4: I think "ton" here is quantifying "features". Do "are" makes sense to me at least

> As always, there are a _ton_ of new features, bug fixes, and quality of life tweaks in this release, but here are some of the highlights: 

Author: In my experience, it has always been "are". The internet (at least this site) agrees with me: https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/465953/should-i-use-is-or-are-in-relation-to-a-ton

* **New Material system**: Custom shaders are now _much_ easier to define, thanks to the new Material trait and AsBindGroup derive

> * **Camera driven rendering**: Each Camera now configures what it renders and how it renders it. Easily layer camera renders on top of each other, do split screen, or render to a texture in just a few lines of code.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Camera-driven rendering**: Each Camera now configures what it renders and how it renders it. Easily layer camera renders on top of each other, do split screen, or render to a texture in just a few lines of code.
```

> * **Built-in Shader Modularization**: Many built in shader types and functions are now importable. Notably, custom shaders can now import the PBR shader logic

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Built-in Shader Modularization**: Many built-in shader types and functions are now importable. Notably, custom shaders can now import the PBR shader logic
```

* **Spot Lights**: A new light type that emits light in a cone shape from a fixed point
* **Visibility Inheritance**: Hiding an entity now also hides all of its descendants in the hierarchy

> * **Scene Bundle**: Easily spawn scenes using a normal Bevy bundle and extend them with new components and children

Reviewer 2: This should be bumped down out of the rendering section.

Reviewer 5: Agree.

* **Upgraded to wgpu 0.13**: Uses a new, more ergonomic WGSL shader syntax
* **Automatic Mesh tangent generation**: If tangents are missing for a mesh, generate them with mikktspace

> * **Renderer Optimizations**: Parallel Frustum Culling, thread local check visiblity, unstable sorts for unbatched render phases, 

Reviewer 6: `thread local check visiblity` is vague and could be viewed as a part of the former parallel frustum culling to the uninitiated. I'd actually suggest omitting it.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, this is jargony.

> * **Scripting / Modding Progress: Untyped ECS apis**: A step toward 3rd party scripting language support! Interact with bevy ecs internals directly via pointers.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Scripting / Modding Progress: Untyped ECS apis**: A step toward 3rd party scripting language support! Interact with bevy ECS internals directly via pointers.
```

> * **ECS Query ergonomics and usability**: Queries now implement IntoIter and mutable queries can be converted to immutable queries

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **ECS Query ergonomics and usability**: Queries now implement `IntoIter` and mutable queries can be converted to immutable queries
```

* **ECS internals refactors**: Sweeping changes to Bevy ECS internals that make it simpler, safer, and easier to maintain
* **Reflection improvements**: Support for reflecting more types, ECS resource reflection, untyped reflection, improved internals

> * **Hierarchy Commands**: Hierarchy updates now use "transactional commands" to ensure hierarchy integrity at a given point in time

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* **Hierarchy Commands**: Hierarchy updates now use "transactional commands" to ensure hierarchy consistency at all times
```

> * **Bevy UI now uses Taffy**: Switched to a community maintained fork (that we helped build) of the now abandoned Stretch layout library 

Author: @alice-i-cecile this section is yours to write if you want it

<!-- more -->

## New Material System

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart, @Wrapperup, @johanhelsing</div>

> Bevy has a brand new [`Material`] system that makes defining custom shaders a breeze. Bevy's previous material system required hundreds of lines of "mid-level" rendering api boilerplate. This was never the long term plan, just an intermediate step. In **Bevy 0.8**, custom shader materials are as simple as this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bevy has a brand new [`Material`] system that makes defining custom shaders a breeze. Bevy's previous material system required hundreds of lines of "mid-level" boilerplate. This was never the long term plan, just an intermediate step. In **Bevy 0.8**, custom shader materials are as simple as this:
```

If rejected, API needs caps.

```rust
#[derive(AsBindGroup, TypeUuid, Clone)]
#[uuid = "f690fdae-d598-45ab-8225-97e2a3f056e0"]
pub struct CoolMaterial {
    #[uniform(0)]
    color: Color,
    #[texture(1)]
    #[sampler(2)]
    color_texture: Handle<Image>,
}

// The Material trait has many optional functions for configuration.
// In this case, all we need to set is a fragment shader. Ergonomics!
impl Material for CoolMaterial {
    fn fragment_shader() -> ShaderRef {

>         "cool_material.wgsl".into()

Reviewer 5: One thing I’m wonder is how to do hot-reloading with a custom shader.

Reviewer: It still works like before, as long as you insert the AssetServerSetings resource

Reviewer 7: Confirmed. I've been playing with this, and as long as `AssetServerSettings` is inserted before `DefaultPlugins`, hot reloading works great.

    }
}
```

And the `cool_material.wgsl` shader:

```rust
struct CoolMaterial {
    color: vec4<f32>,
};

@group(1) @binding(0)
var<uniform> material: CoolMaterial;
@group(1) @binding(1)
var color_texture: texture_2d<f32>;
@group(1) @binding(2)
var color_sampler: sampler;

@fragment
fn fragment(
    #import bevy_pbr::mesh_vertex_output
) -> @location(0) vec4<f32> {
    return material.color * textureSample(color_texture, color_sampler, uv);
}
```

And just like that, we have a configurable shader material!

**TODO: replace this video with Griffin's cool sphere example**
<video controls loop><source  src="shader_material.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

> This is thanks to the new [`AsBindGroup`] trait / derive, which does all of the hard work of converting the material to GPU-compatible datatypes, writing them to the GPU, and creating the final [`BindGroup`]. The [`AsBindGroup`] trait is powerful: it supports combining multiple fields into the same uniform binding, configuring texture binding types (2d, 3d, filtering, etc), and more. For details, check out the [`AsBindGroup`] docs.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This is thanks to the new [`AsBindGroup`] trait / derive, which does all of the hard work of converting the material to GPU-compatible datatypes, writing them to the GPU, and creating the final [`BindGroup`]. The [`AsBindGroup`] trait is powerful: it supports combining multiple fields into the same uniform binding, configuring texture binding types (2D, 3D, filtering, etc), and more. For details, check out the [`AsBindGroup`] docs.
```

> All built in materials, such as the PBR [`StandardMaterial`] have been ported to use this new system. We strive to make Bevy "internals" the same as user code, and this is no exception! [`Material`] also works seamlessly with our more advanced shader features, such as [shader pipeline specialization](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/shader/shader_defs.rs).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
All built-in materials, such as the PBR [`StandardMaterial`] have been ported to use this new system. We strive to make Bevy "internals" the same as user code, and this is no exception! [`Material`] also works seamlessly with our more advanced shader features, such as [shader pipeline specialization](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/shader/shader_defs.rs).
```

There is also an equivalent [`Material2d`] trait, which enables custom materials in 2D.

[`Material`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/pbr/trait.Material.html
[`AsBindGroup`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/render_resource/trait.AsBindGroup.html
[`BindGroup`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/render_resource/struct.BindGroup.html
[`StandardMaterial`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/pbr/struct.StandardMaterial.html
[`Material2d`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/sprite/trait.Material2d.html

> ## Camera Driven Rendering

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Camera-Driven Rendering
```

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @cart</div>

In previous versions of Bevy, [`Cameras`][`Camera`] were selected and run as a part of one "global" [`RenderGraph`]. There could only be one "active" camera of a given type, and that camera could only render to one target. The only way to render from multiple perspectives at the same time was to manually extend the render graph with duplicate logic. This was _full_ of complicated low-level renderer boilerplate that wasn't approachable for the average Bevy user.

> In **Bevy 0.8**, each [`Camera`] now configures what it renders, how it renders it, and what it renders to. An enabled camera will start a new run of a [`RenderGraph`] to a specified [`RenderTarget`]. The render graph defines [modular render logic](/news/bevy-0-6/#render-graphs-and-sub-graphs) for the given camera and the render target defines the window or texture the graph will render to.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In **Bevy 0.8**, each [`Camera`] now configures what it renders, how it renders, and what it renders to. An enabled camera will start a new run of a [`RenderGraph`] to a specified [`RenderTarget`]. The render graph defines [modular render logic](/news/bevy-0-6/#render-graphs-and-sub-graphs) for the given camera and the render target defines the window or texture the graph will render to.
```

This makes scenarios that were previously hundreds (or thousands) of lines of code as simple as setting a few fields on the [`Camera`] entity:

### Render to Textures

Rendering a [`Camera`] to a texture is now a single line of code:

```rust
camera.target = RenderTarget::Image(image_handle);
```

> This enables too many scenarios to count: portals, rendering UI to a texture and rendering it in 3d space, in-game security cameras, real-time player portraits rendered in UI widgets ... the sky is the limit!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This enables too many scenarios to count: portals, rendering UI to a texture and rendering it in 3d space, in-game security cameras, real-time player portraits rendered in UI widgets... The sky is the limit!
```

Author: This style is counter to how I was taught / how I use them. I think both approaches are valid and I personally like my style better, so I'll leave this as is.

Reviewer 2: I agree; I think this change is wrong.

Here is an example of a "portal effect":

<video controls loop><source  src="portals.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

This accomplished by rendering a second camera to a texture, synchronizing its orientation with the main player's camera, and using that texture in the main camera's scene.

### Split Screen

Each [`Camera`] now has an optional [`Viewport`], which if set will draw to a section of a [`RenderTarget`] instead of the whole. If you spawn two active cameras and set each camera's [`Viewport`] to draw to half of the window, you have simple, painless split screen!  

![split screen](split_screen.png)

### Layered Rendering

> Cameras can now be layered on top of each other using the new "camera priority" field

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Cameras can now be layered on top of each other using the new "camera priority" field:
```

    ..default()
});
```

"Priority" determines the order cameras are drawn in. The "portal" effect in the [render to textures example above](#render-to-textures) uses priority to render the "portal" camera first, ensuring it is ready to be used by the main camera.

Here is a simple example of two cameras rendering to the same window:

![camera layering](camera_layering.png)

This can be used for things like "custom UI passes", "minimaps", etc.

### Ergonomic Target Size Access

Working with cameras is now also much easier. They now store their [`RenderTarget`] size locally, which makes retrieving the size much simpler:

```rust
/// Much nicer than needing to look up the size on the target Window or Image manually,
/// like you had to in previous Bevy versions!
let target_size = camera.logical_target_size();
let viewport_size = camera.logical_viewport_size();
```

This also means that converting world to screen coordinates for a camera is much easier than it used to be:

```rust
// Bevy 0.7 (old)
camera.world_to_screen(windows, images, camera_transform, world_position);

// Bevy 0.8 (new)
camera.world_to_viewport(camera_transform, world_position);
```

### New Camera Bundles

> The old `OrthographicCameraBundle` and `PerspectiveCameraBundle` have been replaced with [`Camera3dBundle`] and [`Camera2dBundle`]. In most cases migration should be as simple as replacing the old names with the new ones.

Reviewer 5: Maybe note that for 3D the projection types are an enum and orthographic is still available?

Reviewer 8: I agree, because right now it looks like old and new cameras are different things.

### No More CameraUiBundle!

Bevy UI now no longer needs a separate camera entity to work. UI "just works" for all camera types and can be enabled or disabled per-camera using the [`UiCameraConfig`] component.

### Custom Render Graphs

The default 2D and 3D [`RenderGraphs`][`RenderGraph`] for each [`Camera`] can be overridden by setting the [`CameraRenderGraph`] component:

```rust
commands.spawn_bundle(Camera3dBundle {
    camera_render_graph: CameraRenderGraph::new(some_custom_graph),
    ..default()
})
```

> This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that generally this won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built in render graphs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that this generally won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built in render graphs.
```

> This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that generally this won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built in render graphs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that generally this won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high-level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built in render graphs.
```

### Enabling / Disabling Cameras

If a camera is "active", it will render to its [`RenderTarget`]. To activate or deactivate a camera, set the new `is_active` field:

```rust
camera.is_active = true;
```

### RenderLayers

> Bevy's existing [`RenderLayers`] system can be used to tell a [`Camera`] to only render entities on specific layers. **Camera Driven Rendering** pairs nicely with this feature. This enables rendering one set of entities to one camera and another set of entities to another camera. We've ported the [`RenderLayers`] system to all entities with [`Visibility`], so this will all Just Work™.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Bevy's existing [`RenderLayers`] system can be used to tell a [`Camera`] to only render entities on specific layers. **Camera-Driven Rendering** pairs nicely with this feature. This enables rendering one set of entities to one camera and another set of entities to another camera. We've ported the [`RenderLayers`] system to all entities with [`Visibility`], so this will all Just Work™.
```

* `is_visible()`: The canonical place to determine whether or not an entity will be drawn. Combines "view visibility" and "hierarchy visibility".

[`PostUpdate`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/app/enum.CoreStage.html#variant.PostUpdate
[`Visibility`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/view/struct.Visibility.html
[`ComputedVisibility`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/view/struct.ComputedVisibility.html

## Built-in Shader Modularization

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

In **Bevy 0.8**, we've (started) modularizing our built-in shaders. Notably, this means you can now import and run the built in PBR shader / lighting logic:

```rust
#import bevy_pbr::utils
#import bevy_pbr::clustered_forward
#import bevy_pbr::lighting
#import bevy_pbr::shadows
#import bevy_pbr::pbr_types
#import bevy_pbr::pbr_functions

@fragment
fn fragment(in: FragmentInput) -> @location(0) vec4<f32> {
    var pbr_input: PbrInput = pbr_input_new();
    // set the base color to red
    pbr_input.material.base_color = vec4<f32>(1.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1.0);
    /* set other PbrInput fields here */
    return tone_mapping(pbr(pbr_input))
}
```

> We've also modularized our mesh and view binding shader logic. When paired with the [New Material System](#new-material-system), users can now reasonably write custom PBR Materials without re-defining all of the PBR logic in their shaders. The new [Array Texture Example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/shader/array_texture.rs) illustrates how to define a custom PBR shader Material using these new APIs:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We've also modularized our mesh and view binding shader logic. When paired with the [New Material System](#new-material-system), users can now reasonably write custom PBR materials without re-defining all of the PBR logic in their shaders. The new [Array Texture Example](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/shader/array_texture.rs) illustrates how to define a custom PBR shader material using these new APIs:
```

![array texture](array_texture.png)

> We also plan on evolving the user experience here. Now that we've broken everything up and modularized it, we'll work on reducing the amount of boilerplate required to extend this logic (cutting down on imports, removing the need to set all PbrInput fields, etc).  

Reviewer 5: Sounds like you have ideas that I’d like to hear about. :)

Author: I (think) we've talked about most of them already. I don't have strong opinions yet, other than that this is still too boilerplatey / tied to internal implementation details (such as how each import is organized and ordered). Things in the vein of:

1. templates that handle bindings automatically (ex: nest the user's fragment() function inside of the actual fragment function and handle bindings + pbr setup automatically "godot style").
2. merge imports into a single `#import bevy_pbr::custom_pbr_shader` line (maybe in combination with import de-duping logic).
3. pre-calculating things using the `var foo: vec4<f32>` / `compute_foo()` foo pattern I outlined in this set of prs.

```rust
commands
    .spawn_bundle(SceneBundle {
        scene: asset_server.load("player.gltf#Scene0"),
        transform: Transform::from_xyz(10.0, 20.0, 30.0),
        ..default()
    })
    .insert(Player::default());
```

[`SceneBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/scene/struct.SceneBundle.html

## Parallel Frustum Culling

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @aevyrie</div>

Bevy uses ["frustum culling"](/news/bevy-0-6/#visibility-and-frustum-culling) to skip drawing entities that are outside of the camera's view. In **Bevy 0.8**, frustum culling is now done in parallel. When culling thousands of entities, this yields significant performance improvements:

### frustum culling system time vs number of entities culled (lower is better) 

![parallel frustum culling](parallel_frustum_culling.png)

Note that "parallel b" stand for "parallel batch size" (number of entities in each batch). We selected 1024 as our batch size in **Bevy 0.8**, as that performs better.

## Automatic Mesh Tangent Generation

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump), @DJMcNab</div>

Reviewer 5: Also jakob hellermann for the original PR that I took over and updated.

Vertex tangents are used in tandem with normal maps to give meshes more detailed normals when rendering them. Some imported meshes have normal maps, but don't have vertex tangents calculated. Bevy can now automatically generate vertex tangents for [`Meshes`][`Mesh`] that are missing them using the defacto industry-standard MikkTSpace library / algorithm (Godot, Unity, Unreal, and Blender all use this).

We have started maintaining [our own fork](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.8.0/crates/bevy_mikktspace) of the [gltf-rs/mikktspace crate](https://github.com/gltf-rs/mikktspace) so we can:

> 1. Update dependencies at the speed required for Bevy
> 2. [Start reining in the unsafe code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/4932) (it currently uses unsafe rust code auto-generated from the original mikktspace.h written in C).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
1) update dependencies at the speed required for Bevy;
2) [start reining in the unsafe code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/4932) (it currently uses unsafe Rust code auto-generated from the original `mikktspace.h` written in C).
```

## Default to Linear Texture Filtering

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @aevyrie, @cart</div>

Images in Bevy now use linear texture filtering by default, which is more in line with the rest of the gamedev ecosystem (Unity and Godot both default to filtered textures). 

This means that textures that require unfiltered pixels (such as "pixel art" sprites) must override this default, either per-image:

```rust
image.sampler_descriptor = ImageSampler::nearest();
```

or globally using the new [`ImageSettings`] resource:

```rust
app.insert_resource(ImageSettings::default_nearest())
```

With that, we get crisp pixel art:

![sprite](sprite.png)

[`ImageSettings`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/texture/struct.ImageSettings.html

> ## New GlobalTransform Matrix Representation

Reviewer 2: We should calling out non-Euclidean geometries as a fun "flavor" line at the end of this section; I know the handful of folks looking for this are going to be pumped.

Reviewer 9: I think non-Euclidean geometry requires access to the full 4x4 matrix (`Mat4`), which could be a fairly easy change to make, but I think someone who has a use should push for that if they want it.

Author: Hmm yeah unless we've proven this is possible, I'm not comfortable calling this out.

Reviewer 2: Ah yep. I'm on board.

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @HackerFoo</div>

> The internal representation of the [`GlobalTransform`] component (representing the "world space" transform for an entity) has been changed from a "similarity" (translation [`Vec3`] / rotation [`Quat`] / scale [`Vec3`]) to an "affine 3d transform" ([`Mat3A`] and a [`Vec3`] translation).

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The internal representation of the [`GlobalTransform`] component (representing the "world space" transform for an entity) has been changed from a "similarity" (translation [`Vec3`] / rotation [`Quat`] / scale [`Vec3`]) to an "affine 3D transform" ([`Mat3A`] and a [`Vec3`] translation).
```

Notably, this allows for shear to be represented. Shear is a controversial topic. Engine and physics programmers tend to hate it. Artists tend to love it. Given that most artist tools and game engines support shear in their equivalent types, we believe it is important to provide this as an option. 

[`Mat3A`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/math/struct.Mat3A.html
[`Vec3`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/math/struct.Vec3.html
[`Vec3A`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/math/struct.Vec3A.html
[`Quat`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/math/struct.Quat.html

## AABB Recalculation

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mlodato517</div>

> When a [`Mesh`] asset is changed, the AABB (axis aligned bounding box) is now recalculated, ensuring frustum culling calculations are still correct.

Reviewer 2: I believe this had a serious impact on animated meshes, which should be called out.

Reviewer 5: Not really. Only if you hand-animate the vertices. For meshes animated through skinning, the animation of the vertices happens in the vertex shader. We talked about having to calculate conservative Aabbs that contain the maximal extents of the animation, but that hasn’t been implemented. So it’s rather a known issue that animated meshes may be visible or culled when they should be the opposite.

> ## SpatialBundle and VisibilityBundle

Reviewer 2: Should be  a subsection under visibility inheritance.

```rust
commands
    // This entity controls the position and visibility of the entities beneath it.
    .spawn_bundle(SpatialBundle {
        transform: Transform::from_xyz(10.0, 20.0, 30.0),
        visibility: Visibility {
            is_visible: true,
        },
        ..default()
    }).with_children(|parent| {
        parent
            .spawn_bundle(TableBundle::default())
            .spawn_bundle(ShopKeeperBundle::default())
            .spawn_bundle(PotionBundle::default());
    });
```

If you know you don't need [`Transform`] propagation (or your entity already has those components), you can instead use the new [`VisibilityBundle`], which only adds the components required for visibility propagation.

[`Transform`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/transform/struct.Transform.html
[`GlobalTransform`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/transform/struct.GlobalTransform.html
[`SpatialBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/struct.SpatialBundle.html
[`VisibilityBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/view/struct.VisibilityBundle.html

## ShaderType derive

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @teoxoy</div>

> **Bevy 0.8** now uses the [`ShaderType`] trait / derive (provided by the [encase][encase] crate) to easily convert Rust data types to GPU-compatible shader data types. 

Reviewer 8: `[encase][encase]` looks like a typo?
```suggestion
**Bevy 0.8** now uses the [`ShaderType`] trait / derive (provided by the [encase](https://crates.io/crates/encase) crate) to easily convert Rust data types to GPU-compatible shader data types. 
```

Author: Nope! Its just using a different link format that lets us define it in a footer. Just scroll down a bit!

Reviewer 8: Ah all good then. Not used to such syntax :)

fn extract_score(mut commands: Commands, score: Res<Score>) {
    commands.insert_resource(ExtractedScore::from(&score));
}
```

In **Bevy 0.8**, we've made the extract stage "normal". It runs directly on the "render world", just like the other render app stages. To "extract" data from the main app world, just wrap the relevant system parameters in the new [`Extract`] type to retrieve that parameter from the main app world instead:

```rust
// New: Bevy 0.8 (parallel and not weird!)
fn extract_score(mut extracted_score: ResMut<ExtractedScore>, score: Extract<Res<Score>>) {
    *extracted_score = ExtractedScore::from(&score);
}
```

The extract system is now parallel, the data access is consistent with other renderer ECS stages, and the intent of the system is clearer. 

[`RenderStage::Extract`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/enum.RenderStage.html#variant.Extract
[`Commands`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Commands.html
[`Extract`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/struct.Extract.html

## ExtractResource Trait and Plugin

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> Some ECS resources have very simple extract logic:

Author: The previous section "introduces" extraction logic. Idk if I want to redundantly re-define it each time it comes up.

> Some ECS resources have very simple extract logic:

Reviewer 2: Ah I was reading this in line editing mode. I'm on board then.

```rust

> fn extract_cool_color(mut extracted_time: ResMut<CoolColor>, time: Extract<Res<CoolColor>>) {
>     *cool_color = cool_color.clone();

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
fn extract_cool_color(mut extracted_cool_color: ResMut<CoolColor>, cool_color: Extract<Res<CoolColor>>) {
    *extracted_cool_color = cool_color.clone();
```

```rust
// In previous Bevy versions, iter/iter_mut had to be called manually:
fn system(mut players: Query<&mut Player>) {
    for player in players.iter() {
    }
    
    for mut player in players.iter_mut() {
    }
}

// In Bevy 0.8, you have the option to use this syntax:
fn system(mut players: Query<&mut Player>) {
    for player in &players {
    }
    
    for mut player in &mut players {
    }
}
```

[`IntoIterator`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.IntoIterator.html
[`Query`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Query.html

## Query::iter_many

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @devil-ira</div>

It is now possible to pass a list of entities to a [`Query`] to iterate over using [`Query::iter_many`], which is significantly more ergonomic than calling `get(entity)` on each individual entity:

```rust
#[derive(Component)]
struct BlueTeam {
    members: Vec<Entity>,
}

fn system(blue_team: Res<BlueTeam>, players: Query<&Player>) {
    info!("Blue Team Assemble!");
    for player in players.iter_many(&blue_team.members) {
        info!("{}", player.name);
    }    
}
```

> There is also a [`Query::many_for_each_mut`], which provides similar functionality for mutable queries, but it uses a closure to ensure there is never aliased mutability if the given list contains duplicates:

Reviewer 2: We could merge https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/5402 and make the API cleaner from the start if you wanted.

```rust
players.many_for_each_mut(&blue_team.members, |mut player| {
    player.score += 1;
});
```

[`Query::iter_many`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Query.html#method.iter_many
[`Query::many_for_each_mut`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/system/struct.Query.html#method.many_for_each_mut

## Convert Mutable Queries to Read-only

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @harudagondi</div>

> Mutable [`Queries`][`Query`] can now be converted to their read-only versions, which makes it easier to build and use abstractions on queries:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mutable [`Queries`][`Query`] can now be converted to their read-only versions, which makes it easier to build and use abstractions over queries:
```

```rust
fn system(mut players: Query<&mut Player>) {
    for mut player in &mut players {
        // mutate players here
    }

    log_players(players.to_readonly());
}

fn log_players(players: Query<&Players>) {
    for player in &players {
        info!("{player:?}");
    }
}
```

> ## Scripting / Modding Progress: Untyped ECS APIs

Reviewer 2: Belongs directly after lifetimed pointers as it builds on them IMO.

Author: Yeah I had this section in mind when I mentioned "strategic re-ordering" in the pr description. I think putting it this far down buries a pretty "big" win that will excite a lot of people. Even though it "logically depends" on lifetimed pointers, I almost want to put it before them. (maybe right after the rendering content).

Author: Just bumped this up.

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @jakobhellermann</div>

Bevy officially only supports Rust as the "one true way to define app logic". We have [very good reasons for this](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/114#issuecomment-672397351) and that philosophy likely won't change any time soon. But we _do_ want to provide the tools needed for the community to build 3rd party scripting / modding plugins for their languages of choice. 

When we [released Bevy ECS V2](https://bevyengine.org/news/bevy-0-5/#bevy-ecs-v2), we intentionally built our internal ECS storage with these cases in mind. But we didn't expose public APIs that made it possible to interact with ECS data without normal Rust types.

**Bevy 0.8** adds public "untyped" ECS apis that enable retrieving [lifetimed pointers](#ecs-lifetimed-pointers) to component and resource data using [`ComponentId`] instead of actual Rust types. 

```rust
let health_ptr: Ptr = world.entity(player).get_by_id(heath_component_id).unwrap();
```

> These, when combined with our Reflection apis, provide the tools needed to start building scripting support!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
These, when combined with our reflection APIs, provide the tools needed to start building scripting support!
```

```typescript
const ballQuery = world.query({
    components: [ballId, transformId, velocityId],
});
for (const item of ballQuery) {
    let [ball, transform, velocity] = item.components;
    velocity = velocity[0];

    info(velocity.toString());
}
```

[`ComponentId`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/component/struct.ComponentId.html

## ECS "lifetimed pointers"

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @TheRawMeatball, @BoxyUwU, @jakobhellermann</div>

Bevy ECS has been refactored to use lifetimed, type-erased pointers instead of "raw pointers", which significantly improved the safety and legibility of our internals without compromising performance or flexibility.

From a high level, this enables us to "retain" the lifetime of World borrows throughout our internals while still using type-erased APIs to support scenarios like [3rd party scripting languages](#scripting-modding-progress-untyped-ecs-apis).

By retaining this lifetime, we can rely more on Rust's borrow checker to yell at us when we are doing something unsound. And, as it happens, this caught a number of soundness bugs!

> ## ECS Query Internals Refactors

Reviewer 2: Belongs directly before / adjacent to ReadOnly query conversion as it enabled that PR.

Author: I disagree. While these were important changes, from a user-facing perspective these are, I suspect, some of the least interesting changes (on average) and deserve one of the lowest spots in the ECS section.

Ordering by "conceptual dependencies" is useful (and should be preferred when possible), but it is a secondary concern relative to "putting the stuff most relevant to the average user first".

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with that then.

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @BoxyUwU</div>

`@BoxyUwU` has been hard at work refactoring our [`Query`] internals to be simpler and easier to read:

* `ReadOnlyFetch` was replaced with [`ReadOnlyWorldQuery`], moving this trait constraint "up a level", making it easier to express in the type system.
* "QF Fetch generics" were removed from [`Query`] and [`QueryState`] methods and types in favor of [`WorldQuery`] usage, making filters and normal fetches consistent in the type system and simpler to express.

> We have more changes in this vein planned for the next release. Bevy ECS internals are starting to be more approachable!

Reviewer 2: Phrasing of second sentence is awkward; suggestions on how to fix welcome.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
We have more changes in this vein planned for the next release. Bevy ECS internals are becoming considerably easier to understand!
```

[`ReadOnlyWorldQuery`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/query/trait.ReadOnlyWorldQuery.html
[`WorldQuery`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/query/trait.WorldQuery.html
[`QueryState`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/query/struct.QueryState.html

> ## ECS Optimizations

Reviewer 2: Really wants a before/after perf graph.

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @DJMcNab, @james7132</div>

Bevy ECS had a number of optimizations this time around:

* `@james7132` sped up entity moves between tables by reducing the number of copies conducted. For larger components, this is a huge win. The `many_cubes` stress test saw a ~16% speed boost in the `prepare_uniform_components` system, which relies heavily on commands / table moves.

> * `@DJMcNab` removed no-op drop function calls for ECS storage internals, which reduced the dropping time for the `many_cubes` stress test from ~150μs to ~80μs

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* `@DJMcNab` removed no-op drop function calls for ECS storage internals, which reduced the dropping time for the `many_cubes` stress test from ~150μs to ~80μs.
```

> * `@james7132` changed [`ComponentSparseSet`] indices from `usize` to `u32`, which makes them use less space / making some operations more cache friendly. Sparse Set iteration is ~15% faster.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* `@james7132` changed [`ComponentSparseSet`] indices from `usize` to `u32`, which makes them use less space / making some operations more cache friendly. Sparse Set iteration became ~15% faster with this change.
```

[`ComponentSparseSet`]: http://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/storage/struct.ComponentSparseSet.html

## Label Optimizations

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @JoJoJet</div>

Bevy relies on "labels" to identify things like systems, stages, and apps. This is useful for things like [defining system dependencies](/news/bevy-0-5/#explicit-system-dependencies-and-system-labels). The traits [`SystemLabel`], [`StageLabel`], and [`AppLabel`] build on the same underlying "typed label" system. It enables developers to define custom labels while retaining type safety. Much better than using something like a string or an integer label!

In **Bevy 0.8** we've optimized the internal representation of labels by removing boxing / trait objects in favor of a single cheap-to-copy-and-compare "system label id" type. 

> This new representation sped up schedule construction by ~30 percent!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This new representation sped up schedule construction by ~30%!
```

**TODO: insert graph here**

This change also removed a number of trait requirements from our label derives:

```rust
// Old (Bevy 0.7)
#[derive(SystemLabel, Debug, Clone, Copy, PartialEq, Eq, Hash)]
enum MovementSystem {
    Velocity,
    Gravity,
}

> // New (Bevy 0.7)

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
// New (Bevy 0.8)
```

#[derive(SystemLabel, Clone)]
enum MovementSystem {
    Velocity,
    Gravity,
}
```

[`SystemLabel`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/schedule/trait.SystemLabel.html
[`StageLabel`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/schedule/trait.StageLabel.html
[`AppLabel`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/app/derive.AppLabel.html

## Bevy Reflection Improvements

> Bevy's "Rust reflection" system: `bevy_reflect` is a core, foundational piece of Bevy's scene system. It provides a way to dynamically interact with Rust types at run-time without knowing their actual types. We've invested heavily in it this release in preparation for scripting support and scene system improvements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Bevy's "Rust reflection" system `bevy_reflect` is a core, foundational piece of Bevy's scene system. It provides a way to dynamically interact with Rust types at run-time without knowing their actual types. We've invested heavily in it this release in preparation for scripting support and scene system improvements.
```

[`bevy_reflect`](https://crates.io/crates/bevy_reflect) aims to be a "generic" Rust reflection system. It can be used without Bevy. We believe it fills a very real gap in the Rust ecosystem and we encourage the wider Rust community to use it (and contribute!). 

### "Untyped" Reflection

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @jakobhellermann</div>

> The [`Reflect`] derives now automatically add a new [`ReflectFromPtr`] struct to the [`TypeRegistry`] for each reflected type. This enables using the new [untyped ECS apis](#scripting-modding-progress-untyped-ecs-apis) in combination with the reflection system. Thi helps enable things like 3rd party scripting and modding.

Reviewer 12: *This

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The [`Reflect`] derives now automatically add a new [`ReflectFromPtr`] struct to the [`TypeRegistry`] for each reflected type. This enables using the new [untyped ECS apis](#scripting-modding-progress-untyped-ecs-apis) in combination with the reflection system. This helps enable things like 3rd party scripting and modding.
```

[`Reflect`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/reflect/trait.Reflect.html
[`ReflectFromPtr`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/reflect/struct.ReflectFromPtr.html
[`TypeRegistry`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/reflect/struct.TypeRegistry.html

### Default Trait Reflection

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @jakobhellermann</div>

It is now possible to construct [`Reflect`] types using their [`Default`] trait impl, provided they register it as part of the [`Reflect`] derive:

```rust
#[derive(Reflect, Default)]
#[reflect(Default)]
struct MyStruct {
    foo: String,
    bar: usize,
}

let registration = type_registry.get(TypeId::of::<MyStruct>()).unwrap();
let reflect_default = registration.data::<ReflectDefault>().unwrap();
// This contains a MyStruct instance with default values
let my_struct: Box<dyn Reflect> = reflect_default.default();
```

This enables constructing components for entities without _any_ compile time information, which is useful for dynamic scenarios like scripting and scenes.

[`Default`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html

### Array Reflection

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV</div>

Reviewer 4: Just wanted to make it known that I merely rebased this PR. The original (https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/2383) was authored by @NathanSWard.

```suggestion
<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @NathanSWard, @MrGVSV</div>
```

Author: Much appreciated!

Bevy ECS resources can now be reflected:

```rust
#[derive(Reflect)]
#[reflect(Resource)]
struct Scoreboard {
    points: usize,
}
```

This registers a [`ReflectResource`] in the [`TypeRegistry`] entry for the type, enabling type-erased read/write operations for the resource in an ECS [`World`]. 

[`ReflectResource`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/reflect/struct.ReflectResource.html
[`World`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ecs/world/struct.World.html

### Pretty Reflect Debug Formatting

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV</div>

"Debug printing" [`Reflect`] references now provides pretty / useful outputs.

Consider the following example: 

```rust
#[derive(Reflect)]
struct Foo {
    a: f32,
    b: Bar,
}

#[derive(Reflect)]
struct Bar {
    x: String,
    y: usize,
}
let foo = Foo {
    a: 42.0,
    b: Bar {
        x: "hello".to_string(),
        y: 123,
    },
};

let foo_reflect: &dyn Reflect = &foo;
println!("{:#?}", foo_reflect);
```

In previous versions of Bevy, this would have printed:

```
Reflect(sprite::setup::Foo)
```

In **Bevy 0.8**, it prints:

```
sprite::setup::Foo {
    a: 42.0,

>     b: sprite::setup::Bar {

Author: Ooh nice catch. I just happened to throw this in the `sprite` example to run it. Very confusing!

        x: "hello",
        y: 123,
    },
}
```

Much better!

### bevy_reflect Internal Refactors

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV, @PROMETHIA-27, @jakobhellermann</div>

Now that `bevy_reflect` is starting to get some serious investment and usage, we've invested time in reworking the internals to make them easier to maintain and extend:

* **[`Reflect`] Derive Reorganization**: the derive logic was broken up into smaller, more maintainable pieces. "Metadata structs" were added to collect and organize derive inputs. (`@MrGVSV`) 

> * **The [`Reflect`] trait is now safe to implement**: Soundness no longer hinges on the implementor doing the right thing, thanks to some changes to the [`Reflect`] interface. As a result, we were able to remove the "unsafe" keyword from the [`Reflect`] trait. (`@PROMETHIA-27`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **The [`Reflect`] trait is now safe to implement**: Soundness no longer hinges on the implementor doing the right thing, thanks to some changes to the [`Reflect`] interface. As a result, we were able to remove the `unsafe` keyword from the [`Reflect`] trait. (`@PROMETHIA-27`)
```

> * "Serialize" logic is now implemented using [`TypeRegistry`] type data like other reflected trait logic, rather than being hard-coded into [`Reflect`] impls. (`@jakobhellermann`)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* `Serialize` logic is now implemented using [`TypeRegistry`] type data like other reflected trait logic, rather than being hard-coded into [`Reflect`] impls. (`@jakobhellermann`)
```

Also maybe doing a [`reference`] (I assume this is what they are) would be good?

For most Bevy developers this is a non-breaking change, as most hierarchies are already constructed using `with_children` commands: 

```rust
commands
    .spawn_bundle(SpatialBundle::default())
    .with_children(|parent| {
        parent.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
            texture: player_texture,
            ..default()
        });
        parent.spawn_bundle(SpriteBundle {
            texture: hat_texture,
            ..default()
        });
    });
```

However for logic that adds/removes child entities from parents at runtime, the following commands must be used:
```rust
// removes the given children from the parent
commands.entity(some_parent).remove_children(&[child1, child2]);
// pushes the given children to the "end" of the parent's Children list
commands.entity(some_parent).push_children(&[child3, child4]);
// inserts the given children into the parent's Children list at the given index 
commands.entity(some_parent).insert_children(1, &[child5]);
``` 

We've also added [`HierarchyEvent`], which makes it possible for developers to track changes in the hierarchy.

There are still a couple of small holes to close, but staying on the "happy path" is much easier now:

> * removing only one of the components is possible (although heavily discouraged)
> * adding default values of only one of the components manually is still possible (although heavily discouraged)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* removing only one of the components is possible (although heavily discouraged);
* adding default values of only one of the components manually is still possible (although heavily discouraged).
```

Author: I personally think the bulleted list style already serves as punctuation and that trying to also treat this as one "normal" complete sentence actual makes this less clear

[`Children`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/hierarchy/struct.Children.html
[`HierarchyEvent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/hierarchy/struct.HierarchyEvent.html

## ECS Soundness / Correctness Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @TheRawMeatball, @BoxyUwU, @SkiFire13, @jakobhellermann</div>

Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness bug fixes this release:

* **Removed EntityMut::get_unchecked**: The only way to soundly use this API is already encapsulated within `EntityMut::get`. Therefore there was no reason to keep this unsafe API around.
* **Fixed unsoundness with some `Or`/`AnyOf`/`Option` component access**: Previous Bevy versions allowed unsound versions of these queries. We now properly prevent those uses.
* **Improve soundness of `CommandQueue`**: It is now sound to store Commands with padding or uninitialized bytes. A "use after move" case was also removed.
* **Fix some memory leaks detected by miri**: Miri detected a case that leaks in our `BlobVec` drop impl. That is now fixed.
* **Lint for missing SAFETY comments in bevy_ecs**: We now require safety comments for unsafe code blocks in `bevy_ecs`.

> As Bevy ECS matures, our bar for unsafe code blocks and soundness must also mature. Bevy ECS will probably never be 100% free of unsafe code blocks because we are modeling parallel data access that Rust cannot reason about without our help. But we are committed to removing as much unsafe code as we can and improving the quality and scope of our unsafe code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As Bevy ECS matures, our bar for unsafe code blocks and soundness must also mature. Bevy ECS will probably never be 100% free of unsafe code blocks because we are modeling parallel data access that Rust cannot reason about without our help. But we are committed to both removing as much unsafe code as we can and improving the quality of the unsafe code that remains.
```

## Android Progress: We aren't there yet, but we're closer!

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf</div>

Bevy now "kind of" runs on Android again!

However Android support _is not_ ready yet. There are issues with how we manage render contexts that must be resolved that sometimes break rendering at startup and _always_ break rendering when apps are minimized. Audio also doesn't work yet.

![android](android.png)

> That being said, this is an important step forward, as Bevy developers can now build, deploy, (and in some cases test) Bevy apps on Android!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
That being said, this is an important step forward, as Bevy developers can now build, deploy (and in some cases test) Bevy apps on Android!
```

Author: I like the oxford comma. You can't have it :)

> If you are itching to test Bevy on mobile platforms, our [iOS support](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/README.md#ios) is much more polished. Bevy developers have already started [publishing Bevy-based iOS apps to the Apple App Store](https://noumenal.app/).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are itching to test Bevy on mobile platforms, our [iOS support](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/blob/v0.8.0/examples/README.md#ios) is much more polished. Bevy developers have already started [publishing Bevy-based iOS apps to the Apple App Store](https://noumenal.app/)!
```

## CI / Build System Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @mockersf, @NiklasEi</div>

As always, Bevy's CI had plenty of improvements this cycle:

* Examples are now run in WASM when validating builds. Screenshots are taken and stored as part of the build outputs to ensure rendering works (`@mockersf`)

> * The Bevy examples are now run on a windows VM once per day to ensure they aren't broken (`@mockersf`)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* The Bevy examples are now run on a Windows VM once per day to ensure they aren't broken (`@mockersf`)
```

* License files are now automatically added to all published crates (`@NiklasEi`)
* There is now a workflow to automatically generate a PR with version number bumps for all bevy crates (`@mockersf`)

> * To make the occasional nightly Rust breakage less disruptive, we've parameterized the nightly toolchain to make it easier to pin to a specific nightly. (`@mockersf`)

Reviewer 8: Full stop at the end when other list entries are missing one.

## Example: Post Processing

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @Vrixyz</div>

Add 3d shapes example (#4613)
Add a fun skinned mesh stress test based on the animated_fox example (#4674)
add a post-processing example (#4797)
Array texture example (#5077)
    Use tone mapping in array_texture example (#5131)
Add transparency examples (#3695)
add a 3d lines example (#5319)

## WASM Example Build Tool

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @X</div>

> helper tool to build examples in wasm (#4776)

Reviewer 8: Those I assume are TODO?

Author: Yup!

## Website: Improved Examples Page

> <div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @doup</div>

Reviewer: I think @ickk should also be mentioned here since they co-authored the original PR

> The [Bevy WASM Examples](/examples/) pages have been reworked:
> 
> * They now display loading bars while Bevy App content and assets load
> * The design / layout of the page is now much nicer

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The [Bevy WASM Examples](/examples/) pages have been reworked:
* they now display loading bars while Bevy App content and assets load;
* the design / layout of the page is now much nicer.
```

Author: I personally think the bulleted list is "enough punctuation" and that treating this as a "single, normal sentence" makes this less clear

> ![examples page](examples_page.png)

Reviewer: Would be nice if that was a short video to show the loading bar, but that would increase the final size, so I don't know how you feel about that.

Author: Yeah given that people can click the link to see it in action, I think its probably better to just leave this as an image.

## Bevy Org Changes

As Bevy grows, we are constantly re-evaluating our development process to accommodate an ever-increasing volume of development. We're long past the point where I can make every decision and I've been slowly delegating responsibilities as my trust in the knowledge and experience of our community members grows.

This release cycle, there were two major changes to the Bevy Org:

1. All existing developers with "delegated merge rights" (`@mockersf` and `@alice-i-cecile`) now have the title "maintainer".

> 2. Rob Swain (`@superdump`) is now a maintainer. You will probably recognize them from their work on Bevy's renderer. They've been a veritable force of nature, driving forward clustered forward rendering, directional and point light shadows, visibility / frustum culling, alpha blending, compressed gpu textures, and more. Rob has demonstrated deep understanding of rendering algorithms, Bevy internals, and Bevy project direction. I'm certainly looking forward to what they build next!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
2. Rob Swain (`@superdump`) is now a maintainer. You will probably recognize them from their work on Bevy's renderer. They've been a veritable force of nature, driving forward clustered forward rendering, directional and point light shadows, visibility / frustum culling, alpha blending, compressed GPU textures, and more. Rob has demonstrated deep understanding of rendering algorithms, Bevy internals, and Bevy project direction. I'm certainly looking forward to what they build next!
```

3. **Maintainers can merge "completely trivial" PRs without two community approvals**. Some examples of "completely trivial": typo fixes, removing unused dependencies or code, and small "api consistency" fixes.
4. **Controversial Decision Making on a Timer**: For all controversial PRs (including RFCs), if two maintainers approve, the PR can be labeled with a `S-Ready-For-Final-Review` label. As soon as this label is added and I have been pinged, a clock starts. If I have not responded with actionable feedback, a "snooze button" / "we aren't ready for this yet", or a veto within a month and a half (45 days), maintainers are free to merge the PR. This gives me the ability to dictate project direction in areas where that is important while also empowering maintainers to move things forward in parallel when that makes sense. We will be calibrating this approach as we go to make sure we strike the right balance between progress, quality, and consistent vision.
5. **I still reserve the right to veto all code changes and make unilateral code changes**. This includes reverting "controversial changes" merged via (4).

> We've used this process for most of the last cycle and I'm loving how it is working so far: more trust, more eyes on each decision, faster development velocity. I still get to enforce consistent vision when that matters, but the community is empowered to drive efforts forward.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've used this process for most of the last cycle and I'm loving how it is working so far: more trust, more eyes on each decision, faster development velocity, no more trivial fixes sitting in limbo. I still get to enforce consistent vision when that matters, but the community is empowered to drive efforts forward.
```

> ## What is Next?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What's Next?
```

> * **Post Processing**: We have a lot of post processing work in the pipeline (some of it almost made it in to this release). The next release will make it easier to write post processing effects (thanks to intermediate HDR textures and a separate tonemapping step), and it will also include built in effects like "bloom" and "upscaling".

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* **Post Processing**: We have a lot of post processing work in the pipeline (some of it almost made it in to this release). The next release will make it easier to write post processing effects (thanks to intermediate HDR textures and a separate tonemapping step), and it will also include built in effects like bloom and upscaling.
```

> * **Asset Preprocessing**: We will be investing heavily in our asset pipeline, with a focus on 

Reviewer 8: Focus on what?

Author: Nice catch :)

* **Scene System Improvements**: This release saw a lot of investment in Reflection. We can now build then next iteration of the scene system on top of it, with a nicer scene format, nested scenes, and improved workflows.  
* **Bevy Jam #2**: [Bevy Jam #1](https://itch.io/jam/bevy-jam-1) was a massive success: 74 entries, 1,618 ratings, and lots of good community vibes. Now that **Bevy 0.8** is released, its time to jam again! We'll release details on this soon. To stay in the loop, follow [@BevyEngine on twitter](https://twitter.com/BevyEngine) and join the [Official Bevy Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy). 

## Support Bevy

> Sponsorships help make my full time work on Bevy sustainable. If you believe in Bevy's mission, consider sponsoring me (@cart) ... every bit helps!

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Sponsorships help make my full time work on Bevy sustainable. If you believe in Bevy's mission, consider sponsoring me (@cart). Every bit helps!
```

Author: I like the ellipses here. Makes it feel more conversational.

<a class="button button--pink header__cta" href="https://github.com/sponsors/cart">Donate <img class="button__icon" src="/assets/heart.svg" alt="heart icon"/></a>

## Contributors

> A huge thanks to the **X contributors** that made this release (and associated docs) possible! In random order:

Reviewer: This should probably mention reviewers as well considering how much we rely on community reviews.

Reviewer 8: I agree, reviewing is often a tedious piece of work that is often overlooked.

Author: Hmm I have no good automated way to enumerate everyone that left a review on a PR this release. I'd be happy to add them to this list / treat reviews similar to other contributions, but collecting this information would be extremely toilsome.

If anyone volunteers to build this automation (or can find something that already exists), I'm on board.

Reviewer: Oh, to clarify, I didn't mean that they should be listed. Although that would be cool too, but just mention the work of the reviewers somewhere. I think my other comment you already responded to in the intro is probably enough.

### frustum culling system time vs number of entities culled (lower is better) 

![parallel frustum culling](parallel_frustum_culling.png)

Note that "parallel b" stand for "parallel batch size" (number of entities in each batch). We selected 1024 as our batch size in **Bevy 0.8**, as that performs better.

## Automatic Mesh Tangent Generation

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump), @jakobhellermann, @DJMcNab</div>

Vertex tangents are used in tandem with normal maps to give meshes more detailed normals when rendering them. Some imported meshes have normal maps, but don't have vertex tangents calculated. Bevy can now automatically generate vertex tangents for [`Meshes`][`Mesh`] that are missing them using the defacto industry-standard MikkTSpace library / algorithm (Godot, Unity, Unreal, and Blender all use this).

We have started maintaining [our own fork](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/tree/v0.8.0/crates/bevy_mikktspace) of the [gltf-rs/mikktspace crate](https://github.com/gltf-rs/mikktspace) so we can:
1) update dependencies at the speed required for Bevy;

> 2) [start reining in the unsafe code](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/4932) (it currently uses unsafe Rust code auto-generated from the original `mikktspace.h` written in C).

Reviewer 13: this renders with just "C)." on its own line
<img width="917" alt="Screenshot 2022-07-29 at 01 24 35" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8672791/181653406-1d01e2f5-7ed7-4bf8-acd1-ac1444e6d8d7.png">

Reviewer 2: That looks like an unfortunate line break to me? The rest of the text is there above.

Author: Just rephrased it to remove parens / avoid the unfortunate confusion

Reviewer 13: yup my issue was with the linebreak, not so much with the formulation. it didn't change much, now with "in C." in its own line

camera.world_to_screen(windows, images, camera_transform, world_position);

// Bevy 0.8 (new)
camera.world_to_viewport(camera_transform, world_position);
```

### New Camera Bundles

The old `OrthographicCameraBundle` and `PerspectiveCameraBundle` have been replaced with [`Camera3dBundle`] and [`Camera2dBundle`]. In most cases migration should be as simple as replacing the old names with the new ones. 3D cameras default to "perspective" projections, but they can still be switched to orthographic using the new [`Projection`] component in the bundle.

[`Projection`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/core_pipeline/core_3d/struct.Camera3dBundle.html#structfield.projection

### No More CameraUiBundle!

Bevy UI now no longer needs a separate camera entity to work. UI "just works" for all camera types and can be enabled or disabled per-camera using the [`UiCameraConfig`] component.

### Custom Render Graphs

The default 2D and 3D [`RenderGraphs`][`RenderGraph`] for each [`Camera`] can be overridden by setting the [`CameraRenderGraph`] component:

```rust
commands.spawn_bundle(Camera3dBundle {
    camera_render_graph: CameraRenderGraph::new(some_custom_graph),
    ..default()
})
```

> This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that this generally won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high-level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built in render graphs.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
This enables you to draw the camera with whatever custom render logic you need! Note that this generally won't be required: most custom rendering scenarios will be covered by high-level [Materials](#new-material-system) or extending the built-in render graphs.
```

```rust
commands
    // This entity controls the position and visibility of the entities beneath it.
    .spawn_bundle(SpatialBundle {
        transform: Transform::from_xyz(10.0, 20.0, 30.0),
        visibility: Visibility {
            is_visible: true,
        },
        ..default()
    }).with_children(|parent| {
        parent
            .spawn_bundle(TableBundle::default())
            .spawn_bundle(ShopKeeperBundle::default())
            .spawn_bundle(PotionBundle::default());
    });
```

If you know you don't need [`Transform`] propagation (or your entity already has those components), you can instead use the new [`VisibilityBundle`], which only adds the components required for visibility propagation.

[`Transform`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/transform/struct.Transform.html
[`GlobalTransform`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/transform/struct.GlobalTransform.html
[`SpatialBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/struct.SpatialBundle.html
[`VisibilityBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/view/struct.VisibilityBundle.html

## Built-in Shader Modularization

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: Rob Swain (@superdump)</div>

> In **Bevy 0.8**, we've started modularizing our built-in shaders. Notably, this means you can now import and run the built in PBR shader / lighting logic:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
In **Bevy 0.8**, we've started modularizing our built-in shaders. Notably, this means you can now import and run the built-in PBR shader / lighting logic:
```

commands.entity(some_parent).push_children(&[child3, child4]);
// inserts the given children into the parent's Children list at the given index 
commands.entity(some_parent).insert_children(1, &[child5]);
``` 

We've also added [`HierarchyEvent`], which makes it possible for developers to track changes in the hierarchy.

There are still a couple of small holes to close, but staying on the "happy path" is much easier now:
* removing only one of the components is possible (although heavily discouraged)
* adding default values of only one of the components manually is still possible (although heavily discouraged)

We're discussing ways to resolve this class of problem, such as [Archetype Rules / Invariants](https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/issues/1481).

[`Parent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/hierarchy/struct.Parent.html
[`Children`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/hierarchy/struct.Children.html
[`HierarchyEvent`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/hierarchy/struct.HierarchyEvent.html

## Taffy migration: a refreshed UI layout library

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @alice-i-cecile, @jkelleyrtp, @Weibye, @TimJentzsch, @colepoirier</div>

> Bevy's moved off the abandoned [`stretch`](https://crates.io/crates/stretch) UI layout crate and onto its new community-maintained hard fork: `taffy`. Together with the [Dioxus](https://dioxuslabs.com/) team, we've dramatically cleaned up the code base, solved a critical performance issue with deep UI trees and freshened up the docs.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Bevy's moved off the abandoned [`stretch`](https://crates.io/crates/stretch) UI layout crate and onto its new community-maintained hard fork: [`taffy`](https://crates.io/crates/taffy). Together with the [Dioxus](https://dioxuslabs.com/) team, we've dramatically cleaned up the code base, solved a critical performance issue with deep UI trees and freshened up the docs.
```

Reviewer 7: I see there was some debate above as to whether to link stretch. But imho, if stretch is linked, taffy definitely should be.

We're looking forward to its continued maintenance and development as the team continues to improve its performance, fix bugs, and add support for alternative layout paradigms.

## ECS Soundness / Correctness Improvements

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @TheRawMeatball, @BoxyUwU, @SkiFire13, @jakobhellermann</div>

Bevy ECS received a solid number of soundness and correctness bug fixes this release:

* **Removed EntityMut::get_unchecked**: The only way to soundly use this API is already encapsulated within `EntityMut::get`. Therefore there was no reason to keep this unsafe API around.
* **Fixed unsoundness with some `Or`/`AnyOf`/`Option` component access**: Previous Bevy versions allowed unsound versions of these queries. We now properly prevent those uses.
* **Improve soundness of `CommandQueue`**: It is now sound to store Commands with padding or uninitialized bytes. A "use after move" case was also removed.

> * **Fix some memory leaks detected by miri**: Miri detected a case that leaks in our `BlobVec` drop impl. That is now fixed.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* **Fix some memory leaks detected by Miri**: Miri detected a case that leaks in our `BlobVec` drop impl. That is now fixed.
```

> * **Lint for missing SAFETY comments in bevy_ecs**: We now require safety comments for unsafe code blocks in `bevy_ecs`.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* **Lint for missing SAFETY comments in `bevy_ecs`**: We now require safety comments for unsafe code blocks in `bevy_ecs`.
```

* The design / layout of the page is now much nicer

![examples page](examples_page.png)

## Bevy Org Changes

As Bevy grows, we are constantly re-evaluating our development process to accommodate an ever-increasing volume of development. We're long past the point where I can make every decision and I've been slowly delegating responsibilities as my trust in the knowledge and experience of our community members grows.

This release cycle, there were two major changes to the Bevy Org:

1. All existing developers with "delegated merge rights" (`@mockersf` and `@alice-i-cecile`) now have the title "maintainer".
2. Rob Swain (`@superdump`) is now a maintainer. You will probably recognize them from their work on Bevy's renderer. They've been a veritable force of nature, driving forward clustered forward rendering, directional and point light shadows, visibility / frustum culling, alpha blending, compressed GPU textures, and more. Rob has demonstrated deep understanding of rendering algorithms, Bevy internals, and Bevy project direction. I'm certainly looking forward to what they build next!

Being a "maintainer" now works like this:

> 1. **Maintainers now have no (hard) limits on the "area" of PRs they can merge**. No more limits on "docs only", "rendering only", etc. It is now each maintainers' responsibility to evaluate their areas of comfort. This does increase risk to an extent, but I think its an important step to allow maintainers to grow organically.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
1. **Maintainers now have no (hard) limits on the "area" of PRs they can merge**. No more limits on "docs only", "rendering only", etc. It is now each maintainers' responsibility to evaluate their areas of comfort. This does increase risk to an extent, but I think it's an important step to allow maintainers to grow organically.
```

5. **I still reserve the right to veto all code changes and make unilateral code changes**. This includes reverting "controversial changes" merged via (4).

We've used this process for most of the last cycle and I'm loving how it is working so far: more trust, more eyes on each decision, faster development velocity, no more trivial fixes sitting in limbo. I still get to enforce consistent vision when that matters, but the community is empowered to drive efforts forward.

## What's Next?

> * **Post Processing**: We have a lot of post processing work in the pipeline (some of it almost made it in to this release). The next release will make it easier to write post processing effects (thanks to intermediate HDR textures and a separate tonemapping step), and it will also include built in effects like bloom and upscaling.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* **Post Processing**: We have a lot of post processing work in the pipeline (some of it almost made it in to this release). The next release will make it easier to write post processing effects (thanks to intermediate HDR textures and a separate tonemapping step), and it will also include built-in effects like bloom and upscaling.
```

* **Asset Preprocessing**: We will be investing heavily in our asset pipeline, with a focus on:
    1. Pre-processing assets to do expensive work "during development time", so Bevy Apps can be deployed with assets that are prettier, smaller, and/or faster to load.
    2. Enabling configuring assets with `.meta` files. For example, you could define a texture compression level, the filter it should use, or the target format. 
* **Scene System Improvements**: This release saw a lot of investment in Reflection. We can now build the next iteration of the scene system on top of it, with a nicer scene format, nested scenes, and improved workflows.  

> * **Bevy Jam #2**: [Bevy Jam #1](https://itch.io/jam/bevy-jam-1) was a massive success: 74 entries, 1,618 ratings, and lots of good community vibes. Now that **Bevy 0.8** is released, its time to jam again! We'll release details on this soon. To stay in the loop, follow [@BevyEngine](https://twitter.com/BevyEngine) on Twitter and join the [Official Bevy Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy). 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
* **Bevy Jam #2**: [Bevy Jam #1](https://itch.io/jam/bevy-jam-1) was a massive success: 74 entries, 1,618 ratings, and lots of good community vibes. Now that **Bevy 0.8** is released, it's time to jam again! We'll release details on this soon. To stay in the loop, follow [@BevyEngine](https://twitter.com/BevyEngine) on Twitter and join the [Official Bevy Discord](https://discord.gg/bevy). 
```

[`Camera`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/camera/struct.Camera.html
[`RenderGraph`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/render_graph/struct.RenderGraph.html
[`Viewport`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/camera/struct.Viewport.html
[`RenderTarget`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/camera/struct.RenderTarget.html
[`Camera2dBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/core_pipeline/core_2d/struct.Camera2dBundle.html
[`Camera3dBundle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/core_pipeline/core_3d/struct.Camera3dBundle.html
[`UiCameraConfig`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/ui/struct.UiCameraConfig.html
[`CameraRenderGraph`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/camera/struct.CameraRenderGraph.html
[`RenderLayers`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/camera/struct.CameraRenderGraph.html

## Spotlights

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @robtfm</div>

Bevy now has a [`SpotLight`] entity type, which emits light in a cone shape from a point in space. 

> ![spotlight](spotlight.png)

Author: Agreed. Dithering will be a nice win. We can definitely file this away as a potential example.

![unstable sort](unstable_sort.svg)

## Vertex Colors

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @HackerFoo, @thebracket</div>

Bevy's 2D and 3D pipelines and [`Materials`][`Material`] now support vertex colors, if a given [`Mesh`] provides them. The PBR [`StandardMaterial`] and the 2D [`ColorMaterial`] build on this and will use the vertex colors if they are set:

![vertex colors](vertex_colors.png)

[`Mesh`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/mesh/struct.Mesh.html
[`ColorMaterial`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/sprite/mesh/struct.ColorMaterial.html

## Regular Polygon and Circle Mesh Primitives

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @rparrett</div>

Bevy now has [`Circle`] and [`RegularPolygon`] [`Mesh`] shapes:

![shapes](shapes.png)

```rust
let pentagon = RegularPolygon::new(10., 5);
let handle = meshes.add(Mesh::from(pentagon));
commands.spawn_bundle(ColorMesh2dBundle {
    mesh: handle.into(),
    ..default()
});
```

[`Circle`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/mesh/shape/struct.Circle.html
[`RegularPolygon`]: https://docs.rs/bevy/0.8.0/bevy/render/mesh/shape/struct.RegularPolygon.html

> ## Render World Extract

Author: Very nice catch. This is definitely a "average user's eyes glaze over" section.

```

In previous versions of Bevy, this would have printed:

```
Reflect(my_crate::Foo)
```

In **Bevy 0.8**, it prints:

```
my_crate::Foo {
    a: 42.0,
    b: my_crate::Bar {
        x: "hello",
        y: 123,
    },
}
```

Much better!

### bevy_reflect Internal Refactors

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @MrGVSV, @PROMETHIA-27, @jakobhellermann</div>

Now that `bevy_reflect` is starting to get some serious investment and usage, we've invested time in reworking the internals to make them easier to maintain and extend:

* **[`Reflect`] Derive Reorganization**: the derive logic was broken up into smaller, more maintainable pieces. "Metadata structs" were added to collect and organize derive inputs. (`@MrGVSV`) 
* **The [`Reflect`] trait is now safe to implement**: Soundness no longer hinges on the implementor doing the right thing, thanks to some changes to the [`Reflect`] interface. As a result, we were able to remove the `unsafe` keyword from the [`Reflect`] trait. (`@PROMETHIA-27`)
* `Serialize` logic is now implemented using [`TypeRegistry`] type data like other reflected trait logic, rather than being hard-coded into [`Reflect`] impls. (`@jakobhellermann`)

> ## Hierarchy Commands

Author: Good call!

}
```

> There is also a [`Query::iter_many_mut`], which provides similar functionality for mutable queries. But to ensure aliased mutability is not allowed, it doesn't not implement iterator. Instead, use this pattern:

Reviewer 14: ```suggestion
There is also a [`Query::iter_many_mut`], which provides similar functionality for mutable queries. But to ensure aliased mutability is not allowed, it does not implement iterator. Instead, use this pattern:
```
